DOC:`Building the NumPy API and reference docs` rewrite (#19128)
numpy/numpy: doc/source/docs/howto_build_docs.rst

versions can be found at

    https://numpy.org/doc/

in several different formats.

Development environments
------------------------

Before proceeding further it should be noted that the documentation is built with the ``make`` tool,
which is not natively available on Windows. MacOS or Linux users can jump
to :ref:`how-todoc.prerequisites`. It is recommended for Windows users to set up their development
environment on :ref:`Gitpod <development-gitpod>` or `Windows Subsystem
for Linux (WSL) <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10>`_. WSL is a good option
for a persistent local set-up.

Gitpod
^^^^^^
Gitpod is an open-source platform that automatically creates the correct development environment right
in your browser, reducing the need to install local development environments and deal with
incompatible dependencies.

If you have good internet connectivity and want a temporary set-up,
it is often faster to build with Gitpod. Here are the in-depth instructions for
:ref:`building NumPy with Gitpod <development-gitpod>`.

.. _how-todoc.prerequisites:

Prerequisites
-------------

Building the NumPy documentation and API reference requires the following:

> 1) NumPy

Author: That is a good idea! I'll make the changes.

   the PYTHONPATH environment variable appropriately.
   Alternatively, if using Python virtual environments (via e.g. ``conda``,
   ``virtualenv`` or the ``venv`` module), installing NumPy into a
   new virtual environment is recommended.

2) Dependencies

   All of the necessary dependencies for building the NumPy docs can be installed
   with::

       pip install -r doc_requirements.txt

   We currently use Sphinx_ for generating the API and reference
   documentation for NumPy. In addition, building the documentation requires
   the Sphinx extension `plot_directive`, which is shipped with Matplotlib_. SciPy_
   is installed since some parts of the documentation require SciPy functions.

3) Submodules

   If you obtained NumPy via git, also get the git submodules that contain
   additional parts required for building the documentation::

       git submodule update --init

   NumPy's documentation uses several custom extensions to Sphinx.  These
   are shipped in the ``sphinxext/`` directory (as git submodules), and are automatically
   enabled when building NumPy's documentation.

   If you want to make use of these extensions in third-party

>    projects, they are available on PyPi_ as the numpydoc_ package.

Author: I had asked about this in the issue #19104 and @melissawm had directed me to the mathjax issue #19036. From the discussion there I figured that the submodule may come back in the future and so we have to keep the section in the doc? I must confess I didn't follow the entire discussion so I was not sure whether to keep the section or not.

>    projects, they are available on PyPi_ as the numpydoc_ package.

Reviewer: The lines above this are correct --- NumPy does use a submodule again; but these lines are specific to older submodules that are no longer used.

>    projects, they are available on PyPi_ as the numpydoc_ package.

Author: Thanks for the clarification!

>    projects, they are available on PyPi_ as the numpydoc_ package.

Reviewer: The second sentence (about getting numpydoc on pypi) is also no longer relevant and should be removed - numpy itself now gets numpydoc from pypi rather than including it as a submodule. It looks like you can eliminate the PyPI and numpydoc links as well.

>    projects, they are available on PyPi_ as the numpydoc_ package.

Author: Will it be worth it to add a line explaining that the submodule is for `mathjax`, which helps us render mathematical notation? We could also add a line in the dependencies section saying that we use the `numpydoc` Sphinx extension to render the doctrings.

>    projects, they are available on PyPi_ as the numpydoc_ package.

Reviewer: > Will it be worth it to add a line explaining that the submodule is for mathjax

I would just as soon avoid this, so we avoid this whole problem again in the future if we decide to remove the mathjax submodule :)

> We could also add a line in the dependencies section saying that we use the numpydoc Sphinx extension to render the doctrings.

:+1:

Building the NumPy API and reference docs
=========================================

If you only want to get the documentation, note that pre-built
versions can be found at

    https://numpy.org/doc/

in several different formats.

Prerequisites
-------------

Before proceeding further it should be noted that the documentation is built with the ``make`` tool,

> which is not available on Windows. It is recommended for Windows users to set up their development

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can qualify this as "not natively available on Windows" or similar. There are a number of solutions to using make on windows and they might work, we just don't want to recommend any in particular.

environment on :ref:`Gitpod <development-gitpod>` or `Windows Subsystem
for Linux (WSL) <https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install-win10>`_.
Gitpod is recommended if you have good internet connectivity and want a temporary setup.
WSL is a good option for a persistent local setup.

Building the NumPy documentation and API reference requires the following:

1) NumPy

   Since large parts of the main documentation are obtained from NumPy via
   ``import numpy`` and examining the docstrings, you will need to first
   :ref:`build <building-from-source>`, and install it so that the correct version is imported.
   NumPy has to be re-built and re-installed every time you fetch the latest version of the
   repository, before generating the documentation. This ensures that the NumPy version and
   the git repository version are in sync.

>    Note that you can eg. install NumPy to a temporary location and set

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Note that you can e.g. install NumPy to a temporary location and set
```

   the PYTHONPATH environment variable appropriately.
   Alternatively, if using Python virtual environments (via e.g. ``conda``,
   ``virtualenv`` or the ``venv`` module), installing NumPy into a
   new virtual environment is recommended.

2) Dependencies

   All of the necessary dependencies for building the NumPy docs can be installed
   with::

       pip install -r doc_requirements.txt

   We currently use Sphinx_ (>= 2.2.0) for generating the API and reference

>    documentation for NumPy. In addition, building the documentation requires

Reviewer 2: Actually, in the `doc_requirements.txt` file, we are asking for `sphinx==4.0.1`, but (surprisingly) in `environment.yml` we are using `sphinx=3.5.4`. I'm assuming anything above 3.5.4 works - @rossbar can you help us here?

Reviewer 3: I didn't update the `environment.yml` when I updated `doc_requirements.txt`, and we have no check that the requirements are in sync. It would be nice to have an automatic way to update the docs, maybe we could `include` the relevant lines of the `doc_requirements.txt` or alternatively suggest users do `pip install -r doc_requirements.txt` without mentioning exact versions?

Author: I think not specifying the exact versions will be better for the maintenance of the doc. Since users don't have to separately install `Sphinx`, I don't think it will cause any problems.

Reviewer: > I'm assuming anything above 3.5.4 works

AFAIK there's no reason to pin to 3.5.4 - I've been building with ~=4 for a while now without problems

> and we have no check that the requirements are in sync.

I'm not sure what the best practices are for keeping `environments.yml` and `requirements.txt` in sync. I think there's a way in `environments.yml` files to specify to use `pip` for certain dependencies... maybe that supports requirements files? I'm not really sure...

   the Sphinx extension `plot_directive`, which is shipped with Matplotlib_. SciPy_

>    is installed since some of the plots in the random module require `scipy.special`

Reviewer 2: There are other places - for example in the SVD tutorial SciPy is also needed. Maybe just say "some examples and documents require the use of SciPy functions".
